Wim Corsten has been a health manager since the mid-1970s, after studying social pedagogics with a specialisation in organization management. We discussed the organisation and funding of preventive child care from the mid-1970s until recently at 12-1-2022.

It is interesting that in Corsten's memory, [[1980 Gewijzigde Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten]] is of fundamental importance. This law made funding of preventive child care part of the publicly-funded [[1968 Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten]]. However, this law required Cross Societies to have a certain scale [[Schaalgrootte-eis]] in order to become "recognised" as [[Erkende Kruisvereniging]]. This had the result that most cross organisations were required to merge or pursue reorganisation in the 1980s - preventive child health was, however, still executed by cross associations. This changed within the [[1997 Algemene Wet Bijzondere Ziektekosten]], when family care ([[gezinsverzorging]]) became part of the AWBZ. This caused and accelerated the mergers between cross societies and home care organisations. As a result, preventive child care became part of regional home care organisations. In 2008, funding of preventive child health became allocated through municipal funds with [[2008 wet publieke gezondheid]]. As school physicians were already funded and executed by municipal health services, the tendency was to take over preventive child care by municipal health services.

In this story, the [[1989 wet collectieve preventie Volksgezondheid]], and later the [[2001 gewijzigde wet collectieve preventie]] did not play a significant role even though responsibilities were laid at the municipality.
